Implementing file descriptor usage in addition to socket path (#292)
cyberus-technology/usbvfiod: docs/users/systemd.md

# Systemd setup

> ## Using systemd socket units

Reviewer: nit: section headings only make sense when there are multiple. Do you plan on adding more sections to this document? A single `# H1` is fine, but if you use `## H2` and lower, there should be more than one.

Author: I don't plan to. It was a "holding a door open", but this can be changed back into separate headlines when it becomes necessary.

**Why?**

An upstream service will be started automatically when someone connects to the socket. For example, Cloud Hypervisor will start and be given a socket path managed by a systemd socket unit. When the Cloud Hypervisor process connects to the socket, systemd will start the usbvfiod service unit.

When the Cloud Hypervisor recreates the VM due to a reboot the socket connection will be broken.
Upon breaking the vfio-user connection usbvfiod will exit and the `--socket-path` be removed.
Until usbvfiod is restarted and has recreated the socket, Cloud Hypervisor will fail to restart due to the missing socket. This will work for a graceful shutdown where usbvfiod can clean up sockets before completely exiting and being restarted.
In any other case the restart of usbvfiod will be blocked by preexisting files (not previously cleaned sockets) that will not be overwritten. Because Cloud Hypervisor in the `--socket-path` variant depends on usbvfiod it might be blocked infinitely due to that missing cleanup.

> Using systemd to manage the socket and providing it over the `--fd` argument decouples the upstream `usbvfiod.service` from its socket. It is not a direct dependency for the `cloud-hypervisor.service` anymore, the socket unit is. With usbvfiod's behavior to exit if the single vfio-user client disconnects both services will still restart on a guest reboot.

Reviewer: I would avoid 'upstream' here. And not "both services" restart. Only usbvfiod restarts. Cloud hypervisor keeps running. It just re-establishes the socket connection when it recreates the VM.

> When depending on the socket unit there is a definitive moment when the file system path for the socket exists (when the socket unit succeeded). This removes the uncertainty that a simple dependence on the service itself does not give any indication when the service has created the socket. In an extreme case the downstream service could have started and exited too early and so often, it might remain in a failed status.

Reviewer: We can shorten this.

```suggestion
When depending on the socket unit, the file system path for the socket is guaranteed to exist when the unit succeeds. A dependence on the service itself does not give any guarantee the socket has been created before dependent services start. This may lead to spurious service startup failures.
```

```ini
[Unit]

[Service]
Environment="LOCALE_ARCHIVE=/nix/store/54jg0kk0cn5h7j19r0l8x36fmbfywwjj-glibc-locales-2.42-67/lib/locale/locale-archive"
Environment="PATH=/nix/store/di26b1kkbammy0sj70nq5qzvfrh78wxl-coreutils-9.11/bin:/nix/store/fcqbwp5hx5wh3lzf0457wmf0divknz7y-findutils-4.11.0/bin:/nix/store/aak8d9mrdv9sgn0lcg7xss7wxdg9sqh3-gnugrep-3.12/bin:/nix/store/7mfsmbhsd3arnypipwm251rcd0b45riy-gnused-4.10/bin:/nix/store/r6sz8p6sd6c73fp9z8nzl04dri7lyx8n-systemd-261.1/bin:/nix/store/di26b1kkbammy0sj70nq5qzvfrh78wxl-coreutils-9.11/sbin:/nix/store/fcqbwp5hx5wh3lzf0457wmf0divknz7y-findutils-4.11.0/sbin:/nix/store/aak8d9mrdv9sgn0lcg7xss7wxdg9sqh3-gnugrep-3.12/sbin:/nix/store/7mfsmbhsd3arnypipwm251rcd0b45riy-gnused-4.10/sbin:/nix/store/r6sz8p6sd6c73fp9z8nzl04dri7lyx8n-systemd-261.1/sbin"
Environment="RUST_BACKTRACE=full"
Environment="TZDIR=/nix/store/2nndxyf3phkb5aggxm3c16sapa0f49kz-tzdata-2026c/share/zoneinfo"
ExecStart=/nix/store/ipqd1zhfdai5m9gzw40syjk4dbamnnhp-usbvfiod-0.2.0/bin/usbvfiod -v --fd 3 --hotplug-fd 4 --device "/dev/bus/usb/testdevice"

Group=usbaccess
Restart=on-failure
RestartSec=2s
User=usbaccess
```

#### Systemd Unit: cloud-hypervisor.service

> The `cloud-hypervisor.service` needs to declare a dependence on `usbvfiod.socket` (via `Unit.Requires`) to ensure the path in the filesystem is created before starting Cloud Hypervisor. A dependence directly on `usbvfiod.service` is not necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `cloud-hypervisor.service` declares a dependency on `usbvfiod.socket` (via `Unit.Requires`) to ensure the path in the filesystem exists before starting Cloud Hypervisor. A dependency directly on `usbvfiod.service` is not necessary.
```

When starting Cloud Hypervisor, the vfio-user socket path is provided in the same way as it is without a systemd socket unit (see the `Service.ExecStart` field below). In this example the `--user-device` receives the first of the two defined `Socket.ListenStream` paths, because the `usbvfiod.service` configuration above used file descriptor 3 for the vfio-user server.

> When the `Install.WantedBy` starts Cloud Hypervisor, it is expected to connect to the socket path provided with the `--user-device` argument. Anyone establishing a connection to a socket unit defined path will prompt systemd to start the service unit behind the socket and pass on all communication.

Reviewer: We can shorten this as well.

```suggestion
When the `Install.WantedBy` starts Cloud Hypervisor, it connects to the socket path provided with the `--user-device` argument. Establishing a connection to a socket unit defined path will prompt systemd to start the service unit behind the socket and pass on all communication.
```

Environment="TZDIR=/nix/store/2nndxyf3phkb5aggxm3c16sapa0f49kz-tzdata-2026c/share/zoneinfo"
ExecStart=/nix/store/kxnddbaypz5sic0dgqx60lp4k9z662yg-cloud-hypervisor-53.0/bin/cloud-hypervisor --memory size=2G,shared=on --console file=/tmp/console.log --serial off \
  --kernel /nix/store/nmyhzfvkn5zagl7lc16w9m6d54v4696d-linux-6.18.41/bzImage \
  --cmdline 'init=/nix/store/wgjjv8axl1rlfk277h0p4al3x1jn1w95-nixos-system-nixos-kexec-26.11.20260803.104240a/init usbcore.autosuspend=-1 console=hvc0 console=tty0 xhci_pci.dyndbg==pmfl xhci_hcd.dyndbg==pmfl nohibernate root=fstab loglevel=8 lsm=landlock,yama,bpf' \
  --initramfs /nix/store/swc8c4c3kv1w21mlzcrw7kfpj64pq515-initrd/initrd \
  --user-device socket=/tmp/usbvfiod \
  --net "tap=tap0,mac=,ip=192.168.100.1,mask=255.255.255.0"

Restart=on-failure
RestartSec=2s

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

> In these example configurations the hotplug service is also managed through systemd. Udev rules could trigger oneshot services to attempt hotplug commands that for example attach a device. Doing this would trigger systemd to start the `usbvfiod.service` before the Cloud Hypervisor service is started.

Reviewer: The "could" and "would" is too weak. Just remove those and the sentences already read better. It's a precise description of the example configuration after all. You can also add the device unit template example and udev rule here that invokes `remote`.

```suggestion
In these example configurations the hotplug socket is also managed through systemd. Udev rules trigger commands for managing device attachment state through the hotplug socket. Doing this triggers systemd to start the `usbvfiod.service` independent of the Cloud Hypervisor service status.
```

I see the original intention was to describe a direct udev command invocation without the intermediate device service. You can add such an example as well and then refine that to use a device service unit.

# Systemd setup with socket units

**Why?**

An upstream service will be started automatically when someone connects to the socket. For example, Cloud Hypervisor will start and be given a socket path managed by a systemd socket unit. When the Cloud Hypervisor process connects to the socket, systemd will start the usbvfiod service unit.

> 

Reviewer: I think it makes sense to describe the systemd services and the socket unit separately.

If usbvfiod exited with a non zero exit code it will be blocked by preexisting files (not previously cleaned up sockets) that will not be overwritten. Because Cloud Hypervisor in the `--socket-path` variant depends on usbvfiod, it might be blocked infinitely due to that missing cleanup.

Using systemd to manage the socket and providing it over the `--fd` argument decouples `usbvfiod.service` from its socket. It is not a direct dependency for the `cloud-hypervisor.service` anymore, the socket unit is. With usbvfiod's behavior to exit if the single vfio-user client disconnects it is now the only service to restart on a guest reboot.

When depending on the socket unit, the file system path for the socketis guaranteed to exists when the socket unit succeeds. A dependence on the service itself does not give any guarantee the socket has been created before dependent services start. This may lead to spurious service startup failures.

## Following the integration test example

> This section aims to provide enough information about the usage of socket units with usbvfiod and Cloud Hypervisor to avoid searching for the relevant bits of information in the systemd manual.

Reviewer: nit: So you dislike the systemd manual pages? I'd rather avoid that/reword it to sound less harsh.

Author: > So you dislike the systemd manual pages?

Not quite, the idea was to invite the reader to avoid 5 manual pages with experimenting in favor of one 2 pages with an explained example. Maybe that is more or less what should be written there instead to avoid confusion.

> The following systemd config snippets are created with a nix integration test and should help you get up and running. They include some noise in the `Service.Environment` fields but are kept as is to avoid untested examples. Values for `Socket.Group`, `Socket.Mode`, `Socket.User`, `Service.Group`, `Service.User` are not strict for the sake of simplicity in the integration test.

Reviewer: I get the desire to take examples from working configurations. But they are not working for copy&paste anyway. Let's rather omit the noisy environment, and maybe even replace the binary path with a generic `/path/to/usbvfiod`. That should make it easier to follow for people handcrafting service units.

The example will manage both of usbvfiods available socket options with systemd: the vfio-user server and the hotplug server.

### Systemd Unit: usbvfiod.socket

The Socket Unit's most important field is `Socket.ListenStream`. The order (if multiple fields exist as do in this example) will be used in the environment of the service when providing the file descriptors. The fields `Socket.SocketGroup`, `Socket.SocketMode` and `Socket.SocketUser` are for permission management of the resulting Sockets.

Use the same name for this socket unit and the associated service to let systemd associate them automatically (equal to explicitly declaring `Socket.Service=usbvfiod.service`). Alternatively set `Socket.Service` explicitly.

```ini
[Unit]
Description=sockets to trigger usbvfiod service start and provide communication channels

[Socket]
Accept=no
ListenStream=/tmp/usbvfiod
ListenStream=/tmp/hotplug
SocketGroup=usbaccess
SocketMode=660
SocketUser=usbaccess

[Install]

> WantedBy=sockets.target

Reviewer: I think you need to update the examples. At least the socket paths.
